Dev/robin/9367 navigating merklelogs (#811)
datatrails/datatrails-docs: content/developers/developer-patterns/navigating-merklelogs/index.md

```output
| type| idtimestamp| reserved |  version | epoch  |massif height| massif i |
| 0   | 8        15|          |  21 - 22 | 23   26|27         27| 28 -  31 |
| 1   |     8      |          |      2   |    4   |      1      |     4    |
```

The idtimestamp of the last leaf entry added to the log is always set in the header field.

You can see from the hex data above, that the idtimestamp of the last entry in the log is `8e84dbbb6513a6`, the version is 0, the timestamp epoch is 1, the massif height is 14, and the massif index is 0.

### Decoding an idtimestamp

The idtimestamp is 40 bits of time at millisecond precision.
The idtimestamp in the header field is always set to the idtimestamp of the most recently added leaf.

{{< tabs name="convert idtimestamp" >}}
   {{< tab name="Python" >}}

   ```python
   import datetime

   epoch=1
   unixms=int((
      bytes.fromhex("8e84dbbb6513a6")[:-2]).hex(), base=16
      ) + epoch*((2**40)-1)
   datetime.datetime.fromtimestamp(unixms/1000)
   
   datetime.datetime(2024, 3, 28, 11, 39, 36, 676000)
   ```

  {{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

In this example, the last entry in the log (at that time) was 2024/03/28, a little after 11.30 am.

> ## The trieData entries are 512 bytes each and are formed from two fields

Reviewer: 512 bits no?

The trieData section is 2 * 32 * 2<sup>height</sup> bytes long. (Which is exactly double what we need).
For the standard massif height of 14, it has 8192 entries in the first 524288 bytes.
The subsequent 524288 will always be zero.
The format of each entry is then, for a massif height of 14:

```output
+----------------+
| HEADER DATA    |
+----------------+

288
+----------------+
| TRIE-DATA      |
|                |
|                |
|................| 288 + 524288 = 524576
|  always        |
|                |
|       zero     |
+----------------+ 288 + 524288 * 2 = 1048864
```

Each entry is formatted like this

```
0                                                        31

> SHA256(BYTE(0x00) || BYTES(idTimestamp) || event.identity)

Reviewer: Not currently true ... but we may end up having to go back to this

`https://app.datatrails.ai/verifiabledata/merklelogs/v1/mmrs/tenant/72dc8b10-dde5-43fe-99bc-16a37fd98c6a/1/`

And the previous path will no longer receive any additions.

{{< note >}}
For the forseeable future (at least months) we don't anticipate needing to do this.
{{< /note >}}

## How to read a specific mmr node by its *mmrIndex*

Find the smallest "Last Node" in [Massif Blob Pre-Calculated Offsets](/developers/developer-patterns/massif-blob-offset-tables) that is greater than your *mmrIndex* and use that row as your massif index

Then taking massif index 0 (row 0) for example, and using the first mmrIndex for ease of example

```python
LOGSTART=1048864
MMRINDEX=0
curl -s \
-H "Range: bytes=$(($LOGSTART+$MMRINDEX*32))-$(($LOGSTART+$MMRINDEX*32+31))" \
-H "x-ms-blob-type: BlockBlob" \
-H "x-ms-version: 2019-12-12" \
https://jitavidfd1103b1099ab3aa.blob.core.windows.net/\
merklelogs/v1/mmrs/tenant/73b06b4e-504e-4d31-9fd9-5e606f329b51/0/massifs/\
0000000000000000.log  | od -An -tx1 | tr -d ' \n'

a45e21c14ee5a0d12d4544524582b5feb074650e6bb2b31ed9a3aeffe4883099
```

The veracity demo tool can be used to confirm that

```bash

> go run veracity/cmd/veracity/main.go -s jitavidfd1103b1099ab3aa \

Reviewer: It'd be helpful to update the tool (and this example) to take a massif index too

Such un-balanced siblings would later have to be re-assigned (balanced) when there were sufficient leaves to merge the sub-trees.

While a single root can be produced for an MMR, due to the properties of the accumulator construction, there is much less value in doing so. Typically, authentication use cases are better served by paths to an accumulator.

This detail is what permits us to publish the log data immediately that your events are added to the log.

So the specific properties of Merkle Mountain Ranges lead to an efficiently computable and stable answer to the question of "which other nodes do I need".  Such that we *know* categorically that we do not need to look *forward* of the current massif and further we know precisely which nodes we need from the previous massifs.

The "free nodes" in the alpine zone always require "ancestors" from previous nodes when producing inclusion proofs that pass through them and when adding new nodes to the end of the log. But those ancestors are precisely the peaks forming the accumulator that we want anyway so we can attest to the log state and provide efficient, permanently useful, proofs of inclusion and consistency.

> The progression of the peak stack (accumulator) can be visualized like this. In this diagram we gather the dependent nodes into the massifs they belong too and carry forward the peak stack (accumulator) that fully authenticates the entire state of the MMR preceding the massif.

Reviewer: For the intended audience of this document, how likely is it a reader will choose the (slightly more common) 'verify a user's identity' definition of 'authenticate'?

Author: I missed this one when I policed up the other references. Will sort this one on monday

Should you wish to do this from first principals, using only the raw verifiable data structure, you will additionally need the understanding of the log format offered by this article.

If you already know the basics, and want a straight forward way to deal with the dynamically sized portions of the format, please see [Massif Blob Pre-Calculated Offsets](/developers/developer-patterns/massif-blob-offset-tables)

## Each log is comprised of many massif blobs, each containing a fixed number of leaves

    +----------------+ +----------------+ .. +-----------+
    |     massif 0   | |     massif 1   |    |  massif n
    +----------------+ +----------------+ .. +-----------+

What is a massif?
In this context, it means a [group of mountains that form a large mass](https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/definition/american_english/massif).
This term is due to the name of the verifiable data structure used for the log: An MMR or "Merkle Mountain Range" [^1].

> [^1]: Merkle Mountain Ranges have seen extensive use in systems that need long term tamper evident storage, notably [zcash](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0221), [mimblewimble](), and [many others](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0221#additional-reading).

Author: https://github.com/mimblewimble/grin/blob/master/doc/mmr.md (rust)
https://github.com/BeamMW/beam/blob/master/core/merkle.cpp  (cpp)

Also, the most complete set of links and references we have is here: https://datatrails.github.io/draft-bryce-cose-merkle-mountain-range-proofs/draft-bryce-cose-merkle-mountain-range-proofs.html#name-implementation-status

(I'm not sure that is a legitemate way to use the implementation status section, but those links are the most up todate we have regardles)

Above, we have drawn `massif n` as open ended to illustrate that the last massif is always in the process of being *appended* to.

[Massif Blob Pre-Calculated Offsets](/developers/developer-patterns/massif-blob-offset-tables) gives you a shortcut for picking the right massif.
It can also be fairly easily computed from only the `merklelog_entry.commit.index` *mmrIndex* on your event using the example javascript on that page.

Here we deal with the format of a single massif.

## Every massif blob is a series of 32 byte aligned fields

Every massif in a log is structured as a series of `32` byte fields.
All individual entries in the log are either exactly 32 bytes or a small multiple of `32`.

```
  0               32
  +----------------+
  |                | field 0
  +----------------+
  .                .
  .                .
  +----------------+
  |                | field n
  +----------------+
```

Given a tenant identity of `72dc8b10-dde5-43fe-99bc-16a37fd98c6a` that tenants first massif blob can be found at:

> **https://app.datatrails.ai/verifiabledata/merklelogs/v1/mmrs/tenant/72dc8b10-dde5-43fe-99bc-16a37fd98c6a/0/massifs/0000000000000000.log**

Author: I don't think we have content types sorted such that it can be clickable. If it can be clickable that is my preference too. If it *cant* be clickable, I would prefer it was a code block `https://app.datatrails.ai/verifiabledata/merklelogs/v1/mmrs/tenant/72dc8b10-dde5-43fe-99bc-16a37fd98c6a/0/massifs/0000000000000000.log`, and possibly a curl rune, so that readers can always confirm directly as they read.

Massifs can be recovered independently even if the data for other massifs is incomplete.

The index also provides for proof of exclusion. Proof that a specific event is not in the index. As the event identities contribute to both the index keys and the leaf entries, and as the keys are time ordered on addition, it is possible to audit the specific range.
This will confirm the log is consistent with the index for the time range in which the disputed item is claimed to exist.

The trieData section is 2 \* 32 \* 2<sup>height</sup> bytes long, which is exactly double what is needed.
For a standard massif height of 14, it has 8,192 entries in the first 524,288 bytes.
The subsequent 524,288 will always be zero.
The format of each entry is then, for a massif height of 14:

```output
+----------------+
| HEADER DATA    |
+----------------+

288
+----------------+
| TRIE-DATA      |
|                |
|                |
|................| 288 + 524288 = 524576
|  always        |
|                |
|       zero     |
+----------------+ 288 + 524288 * 2 = 1048864
```

Each entry is formatted like this

```output
0                                                        31

> SHA256(BYTE(0x00) || tenant-identity || event.identity)

Reviewer 2: @robinbryce was this the formatting you were looking for?
Was this supposed to be a table looking visual?

See [reconfiguration](#the-massif-height-is-constant-for-all-blobs-in-a-log-configuration) for more info.

[Massif Blob Pre-Calculated Offsets](/developers/developer-patterns/massif-blob-offset-tables) provides a shortcut for picking the right massif.
It can also be fairly easily computed from only the `merklelog_entry.commit.index` *mmrIndex* on the event using the [example javascript](/developers/developer-patterns/massif-blob-offset-tables#the-algorithms-backing-the-table-generation).

## Every Massif Blob Is a Series of 32 Byte Aligned Fields

Every massif in a log is structured as a series of `32` byte fields.
All individual entries in the log are either 32 bytes or a small multiple of `32`.

```output
  0               32
  +----------------+
  |                | field 0
  +----------------+
  .                .
  .                .
  +----------------+
  |                | field n
  +----------------+
```

Given a tenant identity of `72dc8b10-dde5-43fe-99bc-16a37fd98c6a` that tenants first massif blob can be found at:

```bash

> curl https://app.datatrails.ai/verifiabledata/merklelogs/v1/mmrs/tenant/$TENANT/0/massifs/0000000000000000.log

Reviewer 2: Failing due to auth. Assuming this is a staging tenant issue.

Note that the idtimestamp is unique to the tenant and the DataTrails service.
When sharing events with other tenants, the idtimestamp will not correlate directly with activity in other tenant logs.

When a massif is initialized the trieData is pre-populated for all leaves and set to all zero bytes.
As events are recorded in the log, the zero-padded index is filled in.
A sub-range of field 0 will change when saving the last idtimestamp in it.
The MMR node values are strictly only ever appended to the blob.
Once appended they will never change and they will never move.

Returning to the trieData section, given an event identity of:  
`assets/87dd2e5a-42b4-49a5-8693-97f40a5af7f8/events/a022f458-8e55-4d63-a200-4172a42fc2a`

The trieKey would be:  
`eda55087407b2e6f52c668f039c624d2382422ea8c765d618a0bbbef2936223d`

The following python snippet generates a trieKey from the event data to confirm what should be in the index at a specific position.

{{< tabs >}}
   {{< tab name="Python" >}}

   ```python
  def triekey(tenant, event):
      h = hashlib.sha256()
      h.update(bytes([0]))
      h.update(tenant.encode())
      h.update(event.encode())
      return h.hexdigest()

>   print(triekey(

Reviewer 2: Need to decide how we'll switch betwen python, bash to curl, then back to python

[^1]: Merkle Mountain Ranges have seen extensive use in systems that need long term tamper evident storage. Notably [zcash](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0221), [mimblewimble](), and [many others](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0221#additional-reading). The name is
    due originally to [Peter Todd](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2016-May/012715.html), though much parallel invention has occurred. They have been independently analysed in the context of [cryptographic asynchronous accumulators](https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/718.pdf), Generalised multi proofs for [Binary Numeral Trees](https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/038.pdf). And also by the [ethereum research community](https://ethresear.ch/t/batching-and-cyclic-partitioning-of-logs/536).

Each massif contains the verifiable data for a fixed number, and sequential range, of your events. The number of events is determined by your log configuration parameter `massif height`. Currently all logs have a massif height of `14` And the number of event *leaf* log entries in each massif is 2<sup>height-1</sup>, which is 2<sup>14-1</sup> leaves, which is `8192` leaves [^2].

> [^2]: From time to time, we may re-size your massifs. We are able to do this without impacting the verifiability of the contained data and without invalidating your previously cached copies taken from the earlier massif size configuration. Simple binary file compare operations can show that the verifiable data for the new configuration is identical to that in the original should you wish to assure your self of this fact.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[^2]: Sometimes, DataTrails may re-size your massifs.
We can do this without impacting the verifiability of the contained data and without invalidating your previously cached copies taken from the earlier massif size configuration.
Simple binary file compare operations can show that the verifiable data for the new configuration is the same as in the original should you wish to assure yourself of this fact.
```

Here, we have drawn `massif n` as open ended to illustrate that the last massif is always in the process of being *appended* to.

> [Massif Blob Pre-Calculated Offsets](/developers/developer-patterns/massif-blob-offset-tables) gives you a shortcut for picking the right massif. It can also be fairly easily computed from only the `merklelog_entry.commit.index` *mmrIndex* on your event using the example javascript on that page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Massif Blob Pre-Calculated Offsets](/developers/developer-patterns/massif-blob-offset-tables) gives you a shortcut for picking the right massif.
It can also be fairly easily computed from only the `merklelog_entry.commit.index` *mmrIndex* on your event using the example javascript on that page.
```

Here we deal with the format of a single massif.

## Every massif blob is a series of 32 byte aligned fields

> Every massif in a log is structured as a series of `32` byte fields. All individual entries in the log are either exactly 32 bytes or a small multiple of `32`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every massif in a log is structured as a series of `32` byte fields.
All individual entries in the log are either exactly 32 bytes or a small multiple of `32`.
```

  +----------------+
```

{{< note >}}TODO: change this tenant identity for a production tenant. This one is from a testing environment{{< /note >}}
Given a tenant identity of `72dc8b10-dde5-43fe-99bc-16a37fd98c6a` that tenants first massif blob can be found at:

**https://app.datatrails.ai/verifiabledata/merklelogs/v1/mmrs/tenant/72dc8b10-dde5-43fe-99bc-16a37fd98c6a/0/massifs/0000000000000000.log**

This is a simple reverse proxy to the native azure blob store where your logs are stored:

**https://jitavidfd1103b1099ab3aa.blob.core.windows.net/merklelogs/v1/mmrs/tenant/**

> Each massif is stored in a numbered file. The filename is the 16 character, zero padded, massif index.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each massif is stored in a numbered file.
The filename is the 16-character, zero-padded, massif index.
```

.   APPEND ONLY  .                |
+----------------+----------------+
```
{{< note >}}TODO: check that the formatting of this table is OK{{< /note >}}
We provide convenience look up tables for these [Massif Blob Pre-Calculated Offsets](/developers/developer-patterns/massif-blob-offset-tables)

As mentioned above, we provide implementations of the algorithms needed to produce those tables in many languages under an MIT license.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

| 1   |     8      |          |      2   |    4   |      1      |     4    |

```
The idtimestamp of the last leaf entry added to the log is always set in the header field.

You can see from the hex data above, that the idtimestamp of the last entry in the log is `8e84dbbb6513a6`, the version is 0, the timestamp epoch is 1, the massif height is 14, and the massif index is 0.

### Decoding an idtimestamp

> The idtimestamp is 40 bits of time at millisecond precision. The idtimestamp in the header field is always set to the idtimestamp of the most recently added leaf.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The idtimestamp is 40 bits of time at millisecond precision.
The idtimestamp in the header field is always set to the idtimestamp of the most recently added leaf.
```

{{< tabs name="convert idtimestamp" >}}
   {{< tab name="Python" >}}
   ```
   import datetime

   epoch=1
   unixms=int((
      bytes.fromhex("8e84dbbb6513a6")[:-2]).hex(), base=16
      ) + epoch*((2**40)-1)
   datetime.datetime.fromtimestamp(unixms/1000)
   
   datetime.datetime(2024, 3, 28, 11, 39, 36, 676000)
   ```
  {{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

In this example, the last entry in the log (at that time) was 2024/03/28, a little after 11.30 am.

## The trieData entries are 512 bytes each and are formed from two fields

> The trieData section is 2 * 32 * 2<sup>height</sup> bytes long. (Which is actually exactly double what we need). For the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The trieData section is 2 * 32 * 2<sup>height</sup> bytes long. (Which is exactly double what we need).
```

> standard massif height of 14, it has 8192 entries in the first 524288 bytes. The subsequent 524288 which will always be zero. The format of each entry is then, for a massif height of 14:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the standard massif height of 14, it has 8192 entries in the first 524288 bytes.
The subsequent 524288 will always be zero.
The format of each entry is then, for a massif height of 14:
```

32                                      56               63
```

Note that the idtimestamp is unique to your tenant and the wider system, so even when sharing events with other tenants, this will not correlate directly with activity in their logs.

> If you have the event record from our Events API, the idtimestamp is found at `merklelog_entry.commit.idtimestamp`. It is a hex string and prefixed with `01` which is the epoch from the header.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have the event record from the Events API, the idtimestamp is found at `merklelog_entry.commit.idtimestamp`.
It is a hex string and prefixed with `01` which is the epoch from the header.
```

> To condition the string value, strip the leading `01` and convert the remaining hex to binary. Then substitute those bytes, in presentation order, for idTimestamp above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To condition the string value, strip the leading `01` and convert the remaining hex to binary.
Then substitute those bytes, in presentation order, for idTimestamp above.
```

h.update("assets/31de2eb6-de4f-4e5a-9635-38f7cd5a0fc8/events/21d55b73-b4bc-4098-baf7-336ddee4f2f2".encode())
h.hexdigest()
```

> The variable portion *for the first massif* contains exactly *16383* MMR *nodes*. Of those nodes, *8192* are the leaf entries in the Merkle tree corresponding to your events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The variable portion *for the first massif* contains exactly *16383* MMR *nodes*.
Of those nodes, *8192* are the leaf entries in the Merkle tree corresponding to your events.
```

> When a massif is initialized the trieData is pre populated for all leaves and set to all zero bytes. As events are recorded in the log, the zero padded index is filled in. A sub range of field 0 will change when we save the last idtimestamp in it. The mmr node values are strictly only ever appended to the blob. Once appended they will never change and they will never move.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a massif is initialized the trieData is pre-populated for all leaves and set to all zero bytes.
As events are recorded in the log, the zero-padded index is filled in.
A sub-range of field 0 will change when saving the last idtimestamp in it.
The mmr node values are strictly only ever appended to the blob.
Once appended they will never change and they will never move.
```

If you know the byte offset in the blob for the start of the mmr data then you can check the number of mmr nodes currently in it by doing `(blobSize - mmrDataStart)/32`.

## The peak stack and mmr data sizes are computable.

> Please see [Massif Blob Pre-Calculated Offsets](/developers/developer-patterns/massif-blob-offset-tables) if you want to avoid needing to calculate these. Implementations of the O(log base 2 n) algorithms are provided in various languages. They all have very hardware sympathetic implementations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See [Massif Blob Pre-Calculated Offsets](/developers/developer-patterns/massif-blob-offset-tables) to avoid needing to calculate these.
Implementations of the O(log base 2 n) algorithms are provided in various languages.
They all have very hardware-sympathetic implementations.
```

## The massif height is constant for all blobs in a log *configuration*

For massif height 14, the fixed size portion is `1048864` bytes.

> All massifs in a log are guaranteed to be the same *height*. If your log is re-configured having first been available at

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All massifs in a log are guaranteed to be the same *height*.
If your log is re-configured having first been available at
```

`https://app.datatrails.ai/verifiabledata/merklelogs/v1/mmrs/tenant/72dc8b10-dde5-43fe-99bc-16a37fd98c6a/0/`

> Then on re-configuration it will become available (without downtime) at

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then on re-configuration it will become available (without downtime) at:
```

`https://app.datatrails.ai/verifiabledata/merklelogs/v1/mmrs/tenant/72dc8b10-dde5-43fe-99bc-16a37fd98c6a/1/`

And the previous path will no longer receive any additions.

{{< note >}}
For the forseeable future (at least months) we don't anticipate needing to do this.
{{< /note >}}

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## How to read a specific mmr node by its *mmrIndex*

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

a45e21c14ee5a0d12d4544524582b5feb074650e6bb2b31ed9a3aeffe4883099
```

> The example javascript routines bellow the [Massif Blob Pre-Calculated Offsets](/developers/developer-patterns/massif-blob-offset-tables) can be used if you want to accomplish this computationally

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The example javascript routines below the [Massif Blob Pre-Calculated Offsets](/developers/developer-patterns/massif-blob-offset-tables) can be used to accomplish this computationally.
```

## But which nodes would I want ?

> Typically, you would be verifying the inclusion of an event in the log. This inclusion is verified by selecting the sibling path needed to recreate the root hash starting from your leaf hash. You create your leaf hash using the original pre-image data of your event and the *commit* values assigned to it when it was included in the log.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Typically, you would be verifying the inclusion of an event in the log.
This inclusion is verified by selecting the sibling path needed to recreate the root hash starting from your leaf hash.
You create your leaf hash using the original pre-image data of your event and the *commit* values assigned to it when it was included in the log.
```

You would have:

* The V3 cannonical set of fields from your event
* The `merklelog_entry.commit.index` (the mmrIndex of the event in the log)
* The `merklelog_entry.commit.idtimestamp` uniquely placing the record of the log in time (according to our cloud service provider)

> We are going to give the subject of determining the sibling path its own article. Here we are going to set the scene by covering how our logical tree nodes map to storage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Determining the sibling path will be dedicated to a separate article.
Here we set the scene by covering how our logical tree nodes map to storage.
```

> So what is a sibling path ? To understand this we need to dig into how we organize the nodes in your Merkle log in storage and memory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So what is a sibling path?
To understand this we need to dig into how we organize the nodes in your Merkle log in storage and memory.
```

## The tree maps to storage like this

Merkle trees, at there heart, *prove* things by providing paths of hashes that lead to a single *common root* for all nodes in the tree.

> All entries in a Merkle log each have a unique and *short* path of hashes, which when hashed together according to the data structures rules, will re-create the same root. If such a path does not exist, then by definition the leaf is not included - it is not in the log.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All entries in a Merkle log each have a unique and *short* path of hashes, which when hashed together according to the data structures rules, will re-create the same root.
If such a path does not exist, then by definition the leaf is not included - it is not in the log.
```

> Where do those paths come from ? They come from adjacent and ancestor nodes in the hierarchical tree. And this means that when producing the path we need to access nodes throughout the tree to produce the proof.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where do those paths come from?
They come from adjacent and ancestor nodes in the hierarchical tree.
And this means that when producing the path we need to access nodes throughout the tree to produce the proof.
```

```

The sibling *proof* path for the leaf with `mmrIndex` 7 would be [8, 12, 6], and the "peak bagging" algorithm would then be applied to get the root.

A very nice visualization of how the peaks combine is available in this paper on
[cryptographic, asynchronous, accumulators](https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/718.pdf) (see Fig 4, page 12)

## The "look back" peak stack can be visualized like this

A specific challenge for log implementations with very large data sets is  answering "how far back" or "how far forward" may I need to look?

> MMRs differ from classic binary Merkle trees in how the incomplete sub trees are combined into a common root. For an MMR, the common root is defined by an algorithm for combining the, adjacent, incomplete sub trees. Rather than by the more traditional, temporary, assignment of un-balanced siblings. Such un-balanced siblings would later have to be re-assigned (balanced) when there

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MMRs differ from classic binary Merkle trees in how the incomplete sub-trees are combined into a common root.
For an MMR, the common root is defined by an algorithm for combining the adjacent, incomplete sub-trees.
Rather than by the more traditional, temporary, assignment of un-balanced siblings.
Such un-balanced siblings would later have to be re-assigned (balanced) when there were sufficient leaves to merge the sub-trees.
```

> were sufficient leaves to merge the sub trees.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This detail is what permits us to publish the log data immediately that your events are added.

> So the specific properties of Merkle Mountain Ranges lead to an efficiently computable and stable answer to the questions of "which other nodes do I need". Such that we *know* categorically we do not need to look *forward* of the current massif and further we know precisely which nodes we need from the previous massifs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So the specific properties of Merkle Mountain Ranges lead to an efficiently computable and stable answer to the question of "which other nodes do I need".
Such that we *know* categorically that we do not need to look *forward* of the current massif and further we know precisely which nodes we need from the previous massifs.
```

> The "free nodes" in the alpine zone always require "ancestors" from previous nodes when producing inclusion proofs that pass through them, and when adding new nodes to the end of the log. Here we can see they are very predictable (can be calculated without reference to the tree data). We accumulate these peaks in a stack because the pop order is the order we need them when adding leaves at the end of the log.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The "free nodes" in the alpine zone always require "ancestors" from previous nodes when producing inclusion proofs that pass through them, and when adding new nodes to the end of the log.
Here we can see they are very predictable (can be calculated without reference to the tree data).
We accumulate these peaks in a stack because the pop order is the order we need them when adding leaves at the end of the log.
```

   {{< tab name="Python" >}}

  ```python
  import requests
  import os

  TENANT=os.environ['TENANT']
  
  r = requests.get('https://app.datatrails.ai/verifiabledata/merklelogs/v1/mmrs/tenant/'+
    TENANT+'/0/massifs/0000000000000000.log',
    headers={"x-ms-blob-type": "BlockBlob", "x-ms-version": "2019-12-12"})
  
  with open("mmr.log", "w") as f:
    f.write(r.text)
  ```

  {{< /tab >}}
  {{< tab name="Bash" >}}

  ```bash
  curl -s \
    -H "x-ms-blob-type: BlockBlob" \
    -H "x-ms-version: 2019-12-12" \
    https://app.datatrails.ai/verifiabledata/merklelogs/v1/mmrs/tenant/$TENANT/0/massifs/0000000000000000.log -o mmr.log
  ```

  {{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Using python, we can more readily illustrate the 32 byte aligned format.

{{< tabs >}}
   {{< tab name="Python" >}}

  ```python
  import requests
  import binascii
  import sys
  
  def readfields(tenant, log="0000000000000000"):
      r = requests.get('https://app.datatrails.ai/verifiabledata/merklelogs/v1/mmrs/tenant/'+tenant+'/0/massifs/'+log+'.log')
      hex = binascii.hexlify(r.content).decode('utf-8')
      for i in range(int(len(hex) / 64)):
          yield hex[i*64:(i+1)*64]
  
  log = "0000000000000000"

>   for field in readfields(`UNKNOWN-VALUE`, log):

Reviewer 2: @robinbryce - needs some fixin'

    0 |0   1 3   4| 7   8|10   11|15   16|18   19|
```

> We call the look back nodes the *peak stack*, because it always corresponds to the peaks of the earlier sub trees. We don't actually pop things off it ever, we just happen to reference it in reverse order of addition when adding new leaves.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We call the look-back nodes the *peak stack*, because it always corresponds to the peaks of the earlier sub-trees.
We don't pop things off it ever, we just happen to reference it in reverse order of addition when adding new leaves.
```

### massif 4

> Note that this case is particularly interesting because it completes a full cycle from one perfect power sized tree to the next. It is a fact of the MMR construction that the look back is never further than the most recent 'perfect' tree completing massif.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that this case is particularly interesting because it completes a full cycle from one perfect power-sized tree to the next.
A fact of the MMR construction is the look back is never further than the most recent 'perfect' tree completing massif.
```
